
DRE-015 — Research Artifact Engine (RAE)

Engine: Deep Research Engine (DRE)Document Type: Core Capability ExtensionVersion: 1.0Status: Canonical

1. Purpose

The Research Artifact Engine (RAE) enables DRE to execute deep research and formalize results into persistent, stateful, and executable Research Artifacts.

A Research Artifact represents the complete evolving knowledge state of a product, topic, or system. Documentation is a projection of artifact state, not the source of truth.

2. Definitions

Research Artifact (RA)

A bounded, versioned, stateful object representing everything known, inferred, and evolving about a research target.

3. Responsibilities

RAE is responsible for:

Topic and scope initialization

Deep research execution across heterogeneous sources

Signal detection and frontier mapping

Synthesis into structured intelligence

Canonical documentation generation

Artifact state persistence

Vector space construction

Lifecycle monitoring and drift detection

Publishing artifact state to PIE

4. Research Artifact Lifecycle

INIT → SCOPE → DISCOVER → SYNTHESIZE → FORMALIZE → VECTORIZE → PUBLISH → MONITOR

Lifecycle States

INIT – Artifact identity created and registeredSCOPE – Explicit domain boundaries definedDISCOVER – Signals, sources, and actors collectedSYNTHESIZE – Patterns and trajectories extractedFORMALIZE – Structured intelligence and docs generatedVECTORIZE – Multi-layer vector embeddings createdPUBLISH – Artifact state exposed to PIEMONITOR – Continuous drift detection and updates

5. Data Model

ResearchArtifact

artifact_id: UUID
name: string
domain: string
scope_definition: object
lifecycle_state: enum
created_at: timestamp
updated_at: timestamp

ArtifactState

artifact_id: UUID
knowledge_graph: graph
signal_map: object
frontier_assessment: object
constraint_map: object
opportunity_surface: object

ArtifactDocumentation

artifact_id: UUID
doc_type: enum
version: string
generated_at: timestamp
content: structured_text

ArtifactVectorSpace

artifact_id: UUID
semantic_vector: vector
structural_vector: vector
temporal_vector: vector
strategic_vector: vector

6. Documentation Generation

Documentation is derived, reproducible, and versioned.

Supported projections:

Overview Snapshot

Frontier Analysis

Competitive Landscape

Constraint & Risk Map

Opportunity Thesis

Architecture / System Map

Strategy & Decision Memo

7. Execution Semantics

Research Artifacts are executable objects, supporting:

Query

Comparison

Fork

Merge

Scenario simulation

All historical states are retained and auditable.

8. Governance & Integrity

Artifact versions are immutable

State transitions are logged

Drift triggers lifecycle re-entry

Publication to PIE requires valid state

9. Output Contract

RAE outputs:

Authoritative Artifact State

Vectorized Intelligence

Canonical Documentation

Lifecycle Events

These outputs are consumed directly by PIE.

PIE-009 — Research Artifact Consumption Interface

Engine: Product Intelligence Engine (PIE)Document Type: Core IntegrationVersion: 1.0Status: CanonicalUpstream Dependency: DRE-015

1. Purpose

Defines how PIE consumes Research Artifacts produced by DRE as live, authoritative intelligence inputs.

PIE does not perform research — it reasons on artifact state.

2. Role of Research Artifacts in PIE

Within PIE, a Research Artifact functions as:

A complete intelligence context

A comparison unit

A simulation substrate

A long-lived memory object

3. Artifact Intake Model

PIE ingests:

ArtifactState updates

ArtifactVectorSpace updates

Documentation projections

Lifecycle and drift events

4. PIE Artifact Context Model

PIEArtifactContext:
  artifact_id: UUID
  current_state: ArtifactState
  vector_space: ArtifactVectorSpace
  documentation_views: list
  confidence_score: float

5. Vector Space Usage

PIE operates over orthogonal vector layers:

Semantic

Structural

Temporal

Strategic

These enable cross-domain comparison, similarity detection, and opportunity arbitrage.

6. Reasoning & Execution Capabilities

Using Research Artifacts, PIE can:

Compare frontier maturity

Identify gaps

Simulate constraint changes

Generate execution strategies

Rank opportunities

7. Artifact Operations

PIE supports:

Read-only querying

Comparative analysis

Fork-with-assumptions

Scenario modeling

Recommendation generation

PIE cannot mutate authoritative artifact state.

8. Consistency & Trust Model

PIE operates only on published states

Confidence adjusts with freshness

Drift events downgrade confidence

No reasoning on partial state

9. Summary

Research Artifacts are the unit of intelligence inside PIE, enabling deterministic reasoning, comparison, and execution across domains.

